Pushkin.
So, I went to see Zootopia at 3:15 p.m.
on a Friday afternoon. It was me,
seven children,
and their associated mothers or nannies.
No fathers present. I was the only I was
the only adult male
in the in the theater. So, I I not only
was I there as a professional, but I
have never been so demonstrative about
the fact that I'm a professional. I took
my notebook out of my backpack, and I
was like, "I'm not here to enjoy the
film. Silence, children.
This is a I'm close reading."
>> I sent my colleague Ben Nadaf Hafrey, a
film buff and literary scholar, to see
Disney's new blockbuster animated film
Zootopia 2.
I told him it was urgent.
First things first, did you enjoy the
film?
>> I did. I really did. I I I I actually
like Zootopia 1 better, but I think
they're they're it's a good it's good
intellectual property.
>> Yeah. Now, you So, you came in knowing
that there was this controversy that
exists around Zootopia 2, and the why
the particular plot choices that they
pursued were pursued.
And um
So, and you came to
uh as I understand it, you came out of
the
theater with some really strong ideas
about why this movie that is the way it
is. Is this correct?
>> Yes, it is correct.
>> Ben called me up a few days later.
Zootopia 2 was now available online. He
told me to pull it up. He wanted to show
me something that he thought was a clue
to unlocking the true meaning of the
film.
>> At 20 minutes and 10 seconds
when
>> Going there right now. The heroes of the
Zootopia franchise are two cops, Judy
Hopps, a rabbit, and her partner Nick
Wilde, a fox. In Zootopia 2, they launch
an audacious investigation into the
Lynxleys, the ruling animal family of
the city of Zootopia, who live in a
giant mansion called Lynxley Manor.
>> Okay, so 20 minutes and 10 seconds and
>> Okay.
>> Just to set the scene, Judy Hopps and
Nick Wilde, the heroes of the movie, are
going to the to the Lynxley Manor
because it's the Zootennial.
>> It's the Zootennial.
>> Oh my goodness.
It's insane.
>> You You know what I'm You know what I'm
going to say.
You know what I'm going to say.
>> My name is Malcolm Gladwell. You're
listening to Revisionist History, my
podcast about things overlooked and
misunderstood.
This is the second part of our
investigation into the very curious
mystery behind Zootopia.
The Walt Disney Company's insanely
successful and possibly soon to be
two-time Oscar-winning movie franchise
about a magical world inhabited entirely
by animals.
If you have not listened to part one of
our exploration, you should do that
before we go on.
And for those who have, allow me to
remind you of where we are in our story.
Almost 20 years ago, a screenwriter
named Gary Goldman says he went to
Disney with an idea for a movie about an
animal kingdom named Zootopia,
where every animal was told they could
be whatever they wanted to be.
Disney passed, but then, several years
later, came out with a movie called
Zootopia about an animal kingdom named
Zootopia, where every animal was told
they could be whatever they wanted to
be.
Gary Goldman sued and lost in a bitter
7-year legal battle, whereupon late in
Disney came out with a sequel called
Zootopia 2.
And what is Zootopia 2 about?
A snake named Gary, whose family
invented the technology behind Zootopia,
the weather walls that make it possible
for animals from all over the world to
live together.
And who had their patents stolen by a
family of wealthy Lynxes. Lynxes.
Could the symbolism be clearer? Stolen
by the literal embodiment of corporate
fat cats.
In this episode, we attempt to answer
the most important question of all in
this long, bizarre story. Who is behind
this cinematic crime?
What did they intend to say? And what
could their motivation possibly have
been?
To start to silence any doubts you may
still have about the legitimacy of this
enterprise,
let me now share with you what my
colleague Ben found at the 20-minute
15-second point of the movie. It's a
shot,
a brief image, looking down at the
mansion of the evil corporate fat cats
from high in the sky.
>> The camera is is like high above uh
Lynxley Manor
and we see the fireworks going off
because it and it is the Disney logo. It
is the Magic Kingdom logo.
>> Ben, every single night
for the last 2 and 1/2 years, I have sat
in my little study with one or two of my
daughters and we have seen that exact
scene before we watch a Disney movie.
And I missed it. I missed it. How did I
miss it?
>> there.
>> It's an unbelievable It is an
unbelievable visual quotation.
>> It is an the visual quotation of how
every Disney film starts with a firework
over the over the magic castle.
>> to be clear,
what this image is suggesting is that
Linksley Manor, the home of the fat cats
who stole the IP from Gary the snake, is
essentially the Disney castle.
Yeah, the fat cats are in the Disney
castle. The fat cats are in the Disney
castle.
Disney,
famously the Fortune 500 company most
consumed with protecting its association
with everything wholesome and good, has
done something completely out of
character.
They've made a movie, a huge movie,
in which the home of evil cats who steal
ideas from innocent reptiles is
presented with exactly the same visual
language as the iconic Disney castle.
Well, wait, Malcolm. Maybe maybe this is
too much. Maybe, you know, they had a
party. This is just a the fireworks
display, whatever. Like it's you know,
you could write this off if you were a
true skeptic, but
I would say then we should look at the
frame at 26 minutes and 42 seconds.
So this is after
>> 26:42,
okay? Hold on. So yeah, set it up for
me.
>> so Gary the Gary Gary the snake has
revealed himself.
>> Ben had me take a look at the moment
where Gary the snake has finally gotten
a hold of the evidence he needs to prove
that snakes really invented Zootopia.
The crucial little bit of evidence in
his case against the Linksleys.
You can hear the emotion in his voice.
>> We aren't the bad guys.
They are.
And this journal holds the secret that
will prove it.
I have
to prove it.
Please.
>> I was thinking to myself as this
happened, I was like
I had seen the fireworks display give 6
minutes earlier and I was like, "Wow,
that really looked like the Disney
logo." But if if it were Disney, then
surely there would be some other sign in
here that were meant to read this as a
parallel to the magic castle. And so, 26
minutes and 42 seconds, watch what
happens when they race out of the
ballroom and through the kitchen.
>> Okay, I'm watching it right now. The
snake goes through the kitchen.
It's mayhem. They're racing for their
lives. She follows him down the hallway.
Going through the kitchen, they take the
hat off the chef.
>> Do you know what that is?
>> Is that Ratatouille?
>> Ratatouille, a famous Disney film.
>> Oh my god.
It goes on.
At one point, we see a weatherman.
What's his name? Bob Tiger.
Get it?
Bob Iger is the CEO of the Walt Disney
Company.
In a movie about the weather in
Zootopia, the person in charge with
telling everyone about the weather in
Zootopia is
the head of Walt Disney.
>> Tomorrow's weather is, again,
everything.
>> To announce
>> They brought Bob in to voice the
character, of course.
There's more. Later in the movie, Judy
Hopps and Nick Wilde leave the castle
and pass a weasel selling bootleg DVDs
of Disney films.
Surely this is gratuitously
self-referential. Just listen.
>> ANYTHING YOU NEED, I GOT THEM. SEQUELS,
PREQUELS, THREEQUELS. Who says the
industry's going down the tubes?
>> So, I think the whole thing is just
like, "Fuck you, Disney." And okay, last
thing, sorry. I will stop after this.
>> No, don't stop. Don't stop.
Coming up after the break,
we invite some other critics to join the
party.
Before we go on, it is important to
establish a few things.
First, there is a universe where the
obsessive critic sees things in a script
that do not exist.
In the 1980 masterpiece The Shining, the
director Stanley Kubrick has the little
boy Danny wearing a sweater decorated
with a reference to the Apollo 11 moon
landing.
And there are people on the internet who
see that sweater weighted with
significance. I'm quoting now from
Reddit.
>> In the movie The Shining, we see Danny
is wearing a sweater which has Apollo 11
writing on it. It's due to the fact that
Stanley Kubrick directed this movie and
he was also the guy who directed the
fake moon landing.
>> Maybe.
Or maybe not.
Sometimes a sweater is just a sweater.
On the other hand, speaking of Kubrick,
there's a whole sequence in Zootopia 2
that also seems to reference The
Shining. The villainous Doug Ramses
and limps his way through a maze behind
the castle in an exact visual quotation
of the way Jack Nicholson famously
grimaces and limps his way through a
maze in the actual Shining. That is not
a coincidence.
There are no coincidences in animated
movies. They take years to make. Every
single frame is drawn and plotted and
executed according to a plan. My point
is, if there's a Ratatouille moment,
weasels selling bootlegged Disney DVDs,
a weatherman named Bob Tiger, and
fireworks exploding over the Ramses
Manor in exactly the same way that
fireworks explode over the Disney
castle,
the people who made Zootopia 2
did that for a reason.
Okay.
Second thing.
What was that reason?
It's not a sly dig, an inside joke, some
wink-wink. Whoever was behind Zootopia 2
clearly wanted to make a statement.
Exhibit A, a pivotal scene at the 1-hour
and 29-minute mark. Judy Hopps and Nick
Wilde have finally apprehended Poppert
Linskey, sign of the evil Linskey
family.
Gary the snake wraps his body around
Poppert, immobilizing him. Poppert is
angry, speaking his truth,
and then Judy Hopps
silences him.
>> No one will believe you over us.
We've always been better than you, and
we always will be.
Nothing you do matters.
>> Well,
it matters to him.
>> Now, that I think is the crucial part.
Nothing you do matters. This film is not
going to
>> change anything.
>> re- It's not going to change anything.
But Disney owns Zootopia.
>> But it matters to him.
>> to him.
>> Talking about Gary the snake.
You just pointed me to a scene that is
in essence the climax of the movie.
>> This is the end of the film, yeah.
>> The Linskeys have finally been brought
to justice.
>> The fat cats are going to live in the
magic kingdom.
>> Fat cats are going to live in the magic
kingdom. And our heroes, the bunny, Judy
Hopps,
and Judy says it does matter. And she
looks at Gary the snake and says it
matters to him. And this is I mean, it's
I can't believe I missed this. This is
the screenwriter
saying to Gary,
Gary, it I I I understand what you've
been through.
We We took your idea. I can't give you
You're You're never going to get
recognized in the court of law
for being the originator of Zootopia,
but we can at least give you this small
moment of satisfaction that we
understand what you went through, and we
understand your contribution. That you
are You're Gary the snake, and you
invent your family invented this.
It's like it's insane.
>> It's crazy. It's very explicit. It's It
tracks so perfectly.
>> Ben and I talked about this moment with
the filmmakers Brit Marling and Zal
Batmanglij. On my instructions, Brit and
Zal dropped everything and went
immediately to see Zootopia 2.
>> It's not like they made it subtle as if
someone in the writing team knew the
score and wanted to do a wink to Gary.
Like, "Hey, I know what went down. This
is our internal apology, a quiet apology
to you that only you would understand."
They made it in a way that like
any part of the audience, his family,
the surrounding community that knows
anything about it, would know that this
is what the movie is. Like, it's not
quiet. It's it's public.
>> It is not a Straussian reading of the
controversy. In the sense of you know
you know, the famous theory of Leo
Strauss who argued that
texts in conflicted times have hidden
messages and the goal of the scholar is
to decode the hidden message. Right? The
The person attacking the church in
the 16th century would never do a
a real attack. They would They would
They would make it so They would make it
subtle below the They would praise the
church, but if you read between the
lines, you would see this is There's no
Straussian reading here available in
Zootopia 2. It is what it is.
>> Yeah, it's not between the lines, it's
the lines themselves.
>> It is literally the lines on the book.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, and it's not Iranian cinema which
has to get through all the censorship.
So, that is an interesting thing about
Disney. It shows you
there's no one at the wheel.
Like, they were able to get this through
because there it
No, the powers that be, the Lynxes did
not know what was happening.
>> He's right.
Before any script is green-lit, it has
to be reviewed by the studio's legal
team. The last stop before the wheels
start to turn. Is there anything in the
script that is potentially problematic?
Do we have the rights for everything
that needs rights? Is this bit of
dialogue or description defamatory? Is
this character a little bit too close to
a real-world character?
On and on.
Someone did this for the script for
Zootopia 2. And for some mysterious
reason, that person, or maybe team of
people, said, "All good."
It almost feels like the author of an
anti-Disney film got an anti-Disney film
past Disney legal
in order to make a point about
respecting creativity.
>> It is a roadmap for true authorship.
>> Yeah, I agree. It's an acknowledgement.
It's only I think an apology if it's
just directly to the person you harmed.
But when you make something that's not
between the lines, but the line
themselves, that you're talking to the
entire community.
>> All of us involved in the forensic
analysis of Zootopia 2 agreed.
It's the perfect literary crime. The
perfect crime reading of Zootopia is
that there was a quiet insurrection in
the creative ranks at Disney, where they
felt that the Disney overlords had
committed a kind of moral crime against
this brilliant man, Gary Goldman. They
contrived to come up with a secret form
of revenge in the form of Zootopia 2.
That was a crime in the sense that they
were violating their implied contract
with Disney. But it's a perfect crime
because the movie's so good, they can
never be convicted of any crime. They
can't get punished. Cuz the movie's a
>> They put all this money into punishing
them with
>> The The way to get away with a crime in
Hollywood is to make a work of art, a
work a a work of great commercial art.
And that makes you that that makes you
completely above the law.
It's genius.
>> I I think that there is
there is a strong message being sent
about Disney and it revolves around
authorship and a snake named Gary and
that's a lot of coincidences.
>> And who is this genius
who pulled off the perfect literary
crime?
After the break,
our best guess at the culprit.
Let me warn you. This is going to
require what will seem in the moment
like a massive digression.
Like when there's a huge construction
delay on the interstate and Google Maps
directs you down a side road and then
another side road and then a farmer's
lane in the middle of a cornfield and
you're like,
"Wouldn't I have been better off just
sitting in traffic for 2 hours?"
And the answer is, "No, you wouldn't."
The digression is a digression and not
an alternate route because the whole
point of the digression is to get you
back on the interstate.
Patience, grasshopper.
>> Thank you Well, thank you for doing
this. I appreciate it.
>> Well, I have no idea what direction
we're heading, but let's
put on our seat belts and we'll go.
>> All of this starts with a man named
Lester Bush Jr.
Not the fancy Bushes of Texas and
Connecticut and 1600 Pennsylvania
Avenue, the Bushes of Iowa.
Unfortunately, I wasn't able to speak
with Lester Bush Jr. because he died in
2023.
But I tracked down his best friend and
long-time collaborator Greg Prince,
who told me that his friend Lester was a
physician who joined the CIA and rose to
the position of the agency's medical
director.
Lester was also, crucially, a Mormon.
>> He
was in a family whose mother converted
to Mormonism, and he and his younger
brother were brought along at the same
time. His father converted many years
later.
He became aware of the discriminatory
policy of towards blacks.
Was always uneasy about it, never felt
that it was quite right.
>> Up until the late '70s, the Mormon
church had a policy that said that black
people could not serve as priests in the
church, which is a big deal. Because the
Mormon church has a model of lay
priesthood. Priests come directly out of
the congregation. And if you have a
policy that says that black people can't
be priests, you're effectively saying
that black people cannot fully
participate in the life of the church at
all.
It meant that the church, which was
trying to become a worldwide movement,
couldn't really expand beyond North
America and Europe.
And why did the Mormons have this
policy?
Because it was believed that it was part
of the divine inspiration given to the
prophet Joseph Smith when he founded the
Mormon church in the early 19th century.
>> Conventional wisdom, all the way up to
the top of the church, was, "Well, this
was a revelation that started with
Joseph Smith, and we have never allowed
blacks into our priesthood."
>> But, while he did his medical training,
Lester began to dig into the Mormon
church archives, spent years reading old
manuscripts that no one had ever
bothered to look at.
>> What he found first was, "No, that
wasn't the case, because during the
administration of Joseph Smith, the
founder of the religion, there There
well-documented cases of several black
members being ordained to the
priesthood.
>> Lester's discovery was that the ban on
African-Americans was started by Joseph
Smith's successor,
Brigham Young.
Lester wrote up his findings in an
academic article in 1973 that rocked the
Mormon world.
>> Lester's article showed that this wasn't
revelation. This wasn't etched in
concrete doctrine.
This was a policy and it was a policy
that began with Brigham Young
and it arose out of, would you believe
it, that there was racism in the United
States in the 1840s and 50s?
>> And here, I will admit, we are in the
middle of the cornfield. But trust me,
the interstate awaits.
Five years after Lester published his
manuscript, the Mormon church rescinds
the ban on African-Americans and it's
Lester's article
that provides the justification for that
decision.
When you look at the history of the
Mormon church, which over the past half
century has exploded in size,
particularly in the developed world,
everything begins with Lester Bush's
stubborn desire
to get at the truth.
But, and this is crucial,
even though Lester Bush changes the
course of Mormon history,
is he recognized as a hero? No.
Some of the leaders of the church fight
tooth and nail to block publication of
his famous essay.
He has challenged a powerful institution
and powerful institutions do not take
those kinds of challenges lightly.
>> He paid a price for it.
He was shunned by the church.
Eventually, he just withdrew from
activity in the church as did his three
children. His wife
remains an active church member, but she
has her eyes open.
And
thought that it was the cumulative pain
that caused him to withdraw, but
eventually we were talking about it and
he said, "No, it wasn't that." He said,
"It was just that I saw that there was
less and less room in the church for
people who thought the way I did."
>> Yeah.
>> That That's a sad statement to have to
make, but there was merit in that.
>> Mhm. Mhm.
Only at the end of his life did the
church make amends.
Lester was invited to give an honorary
lecture in Salt Lake City.
An acknowledgement of his contribution.
>> So, here I am
feeling like Rip Van Winkle
and looking like something from a
storage closet in a museum.
So, it's an honor to speak uh to this
symposium and and quite a surprise
both to be asked after so many years and
that the subject is still active.
>> Afterwards he had a private breakfast
with an official high in the church, a
man named Jeff. In the Mormon hierarchy,
a so-called apostle.
>> And then as we walked out to the
underground garage,
Jeff put his arm around Lester's
shoulder and said, "Lester, I just want
you to hear it from me how much I
appreciate what you have done for the
church."
So, we did have closure eventually.
>> Lester Jr. was a moral warrior, a man
who took on giants on behalf of truth.
Oh, and by the way,
who is Lester Bush Sr., his father?
A CPA who was a spy in the Second World
War and spent the 1940s setting up
credit unions in the deep south for
African Americans who had been locked
out of the financial system.
Oh, and Lester Sr. had another son,
Larry,
Lester Jr.'s brother, who went to
Brigham Young University and was kicked
out for being gay and then moved to San
Francisco and became a gay activist.
Can you imagine Thanksgiving dinner in
the Bush household? Grandpa talks about
taking on the Nazis and then Jim Crow
wandering the deep south to bring
outsiders back into the fold. Uncle
Larry talks about being cast out of
school for the simple fact of his
sexuality.
Dad talks about the pain he knew that
African Americans felt on account of
their exclusion
and the fight he took up on their
behalf.
The price he paid.
Stories about the power of a personal
redemptive gesture.
Families have narratives, patterns of
practice and behavior that define who
they are. You spend your childhood
listening to those stories. What do you
become?
Prince would spend every Sunday night
with his friend Lester.
>> Very good family man, had three kids.
Uh just as a sidelight
>> Wait for it.
>> his second child and first son
is the
director of animation for Walt Disney
Studios.
>> Lester Bush's eldest son, Jared Bush,
runs all of animation for the Walt
Disney Company.
And 10 guesses what script Jared Bush is
most famous for writing.
He's this guy who wrote Zootopia, too.
>> Zootopia
and Moana and Encanto.
>> Yeah.
But here This is a question I had though
cuz this is actually what led me into
all of this. I watched Zootopia, too.
And Zootopia, too is a movie about how a
an excluded class of
animals, the reptiles, had been kept out
of the the the world of the animals and
the movie's all about bringing those
bringing the reptiles back into the
fold, bringing the despised snakes
back into the fold and honoring them as
and I'm wondering is is is Zootopia am I
correct in reading Zootopia 2 as a kind
of
Jared is is is he is he continuing the
family
intellectual tradition here?
>> I haven't talked to him about that but I
think you're on to something there. If
you go back and look at Encanto
you see the same type of thing. There
number one the focus is on extended
families which comes right out of his
heritage.
But the other is that the star in it
wears glasses.
And there had never been a star of an
animated movie who wore glasses and he
said in fact when he was given the
British equivalent of an Academy Award
for it he brought the young lady who had
sent him the letter saying
"Why don't you have any animated movies
with people wearing glasses?"
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah, Jared has a very strong moral
compass.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
Cuz it does seem I mean that this is it
fascinates me that
the father is the one who provides the
intellectual foundation for bringing a
group fully into the
an excluded group fully into the Mormon
church and then the son
writes a movie that's all about bringing
an excluded group fully into the animal
kingdom.
>> I think it's a brilliant storyline. I
had not considered it. Go for it.
>> But I did find something in a New York
Times article
that gave me some sense of how he thinks
about these things. The piece came out
before Zootopia 2 and in it there was a
moment which makes no sense
unless you were the one sitting at the
dinner table at the Bush family
Thanksgiving. The reporter wrote, "Mr.
Bush's emotions sometimes run close to
the surface."
Mr. Bush started to tear up for
instance,
while talking about the social justice
subtext in Zootopia 2.
I think that if Larry and Lester Jr. and
Lester Sr. had gone to see Zootopia 2,
they would have teared up as well.
It was Gary Goldman who made the
connection between Jared Bush and the
greater Bush family legacy, or rather
his wife Judy, who he describes fondly
as the internet's proctologist. She did
the digging, unearths the story of the
remarkable Bushes, and Gary says the
revelations gave him peace. He feels he
understood, finally, where Gary the
Snake came from.
So, Jared is representing the family
honor here.
>> Yes, I think that's my interpretation.
>> The Bushes The Bushes are standing up
for the Goldmans.
>> That's my interpretation.
It makes me It makes me feel very good,
I have to tell you.
I mean, so this is a weird thing. I
mean, this telling you this story and I
feel I've been done wrong in a lot of
ways,
but I I feel so close and connected and
grateful in a certain way to Jared Bush,
and I I In my imagination, he's a
courageous person.
>> Have you ever met Jared Bush?
>> No. Well, I sent him a
a handwritten letter.
>> sent him a handwritten letter?
Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait,
wait, wait, wait, when did you send this
letter?
>> After I found out that
Gary the Snake was a good guy.
>> Did he respond?
>> No, he can't. He can't, cuz Disney
they would go they would go nuts.
>> Right. Somewhere Somewhere Jared is
listening.
Jared, are you out there?
On behalf of everyone who saw Zootopia
2,
let me join the Goldman family chorus.
Well done.
Revisionist History is produced by Nina
Bird Lawrence, Lucy Sullivan, and Ben
Naddaff Hassfrey.
Our editor is Karen Shakhgji. Fact
checking by Sam Russek. Our executive
producer is Jacob Smith. Engineering by
Nina Bird Lawrence. Original music by
Luis Guerra. Sound design and mastering
by Marcelo de Oliveira.
I'm Malcolm Gladwell.